2020 HTTP2 chapter (#1599)
HTTPArchive/almanac.httparchive.org: src/content/en/2020/http2.md

chapter_number: 22
title: HTTP/2
description: HTTP/2 chapter of the 2020 Web Almanac covering adoption and impact of HTTP/2, HTTP/2 Push, HTTP/2 Issues, and HTTP/3.
authors: [dotjs, rmarx, MikeBishop]

> reviewers: [LPardue, bazzadp]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
reviewers: [LPardue, bazzadp,ibnesayeed]
```

analysts: [gregorywolf]
translators: []

> dotjs_bio: Andrew works at Cloudflare helping to make the web faster and more secure. He spends his time deploying, measuring and improving new protocols and asset delivery to improve end-user web site performance.

Reviewer 2: Also @rmarx and @MikeBishop can you add similar bios?

> dotjs_bio: Andrew works at Cloudflare helping to make the web faster and more secure. He spends his time deploying, measuring and improving new protocols and asset delivery to improve end-user web site performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
dotjs_bio: Andrew works at <a href="https://www.cloudflare.com/">Cloudflare</a> helping to make the web faster and more secure. He spends his time deploying, measuring and improving new protocols and asset delivery to improve end-user web site performance.
rmarx_bio: Robin is a web protocol and performance researcher at <a href="https://www.uhasselt.be/edm">Hasselt University, Belgium</a>. He has been working on getting QUIC and HTTP/3 ready to use by creating tools like <a href="https://github.com/quiclog">qlog and qvis</a>. 
```

discuss: 2058
results: https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1M1tijxf04wSN3KU0ZUunjPYCrVsaJfxzuRCXUeRQ-YU/
queries: 22_HTTP_2
featured_quote: This chapter reviews the current state of HTTP/2 and gQUIC deployment, to establish how well some of the newer features of the protocol, such as prioritization and server push, have been adopted. We then look at the motivations for HTTP/3, describe the major differences between the protocol versions and discuss the potential challenges in upgrading to a UDP-based transport protocol with QUIC. 
featured_stat_1: 64%
featured_stat_label_1: Requests served over HTTP/2 
featured_stat_2: 31.7%
featured_stat_label_2: CDN Requests with incorrect HTTP/2 prioritiztion  
featured_stat_3: 80%

> featured_stat_label_3: pages served over HTTP/2 if a CDN is used, 30% if CDN not used

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
featured_stat_label_3: Pages served over HTTP/2 if a CDN is used, 30% if CDN not used
```

| ------------- | ------- |
| 100%        |  Bison Grid,Hosting4CDN,MediaCloud,NYI FTW,PageCDN|
|             | Pressable CDN,QUIC.cloud,Roast.io,SwiftyCDN,Zycada Networks |
| 90%+         | Advanced Hosters CDN,Azion,CDN77,Facebook,GoCache,ImageEngine,KeyCDN |
|              | Microsoft Azure,NetDNA,Netlify,Nexcess CDN,Reapleaf,Sirv CDN,Twitter,jsDelivr,section.io |
|              | Airee,BunnyCDN,Cloudflare,Erstream,Internap,LeaseWeb CDN,Medianova,Myra Security CDN |
|              | NGENIX,OnApp,SFR,StackPath,Sucuri Firewall,TRBCDN,VegaCDN,Yottaa |
| 70-90% | Automattic,BelugaCDN,CDN,CDNsun,CDNvideo,Google,Highwinds,Rackspace,XLabs Security |
|        | BitGravity,Cedexis,Fastly,OVH CDN,Reflected Networks,Rocket CDN,Universal CDN |
| 30-60% | Amazon CloudFront,Aryaka,Edgecast,Vercel ,Incapsula,Yahoo,Yunjiasu,cubeCDN,Cachefly |
|        | Level 3,SwiftCDN,Akamai,ChinaCache,Limelight |
| < 20%  | Singular CDN,Zenedge,BO.LT,CDNetworks,ChinaNetCenter,Taobao,KINX CDN|

<figcaption>{{ figure_link(caption="Percentage of HTTP/2 requests served by the third-party resouce CDNs over mobiler.") }}</figcaption>
</figure>

## How is HTTP/2 performing ?

> ### Reducing connectons

Reviewer 2: Added a TODO so this won't hold up merging this PR: https://github.com/HTTPArchive/almanac.httparchive.org/pull/1599/commits/80edfff46ebe7e48a7f9f040593776d8f3514497

<figure markdown>
| CDN               | Prioritize correctly | Desktop | Mobile |
|-------------------|---------|--------|--------|
| Not using CDN     | Unknown | 59.47% | 60.85% |
| Cloudflare        | Pass    | 22.03% | 21.32% |
| Google            | Fail    | 8.26%  | 8.94%  |
| Amazon CloudFront | Fail    | 2.64%  | 2.27%  |
| Fastly            | Pass    | 2.34%  | 1.78%  |
| Akamai            | Pass    | 1.31%  | 1.19%  |
| Automattic        | Pass    | 0.93%  | 1.05%  |
| Sucuri Firewall   | Fail    | 0.77%  | 0.63%  |
| Incapsula         | Fail    | 0.42%  | 0.34%  |
| Netlify           | Fail    | 0.27%  | 0.20%  |

<figcaption>{{ figure_link(caption="HTTP/2 prioritization support in common CDNs.") }}</figcaption>
</figure>

> For non-CDN usage, I expect the number of servers that correctly apply HTTP/2 prioritization to be considerably smaller. For example, [NodeJS’s HTTP/2 implementation does not even support prioritization](https://twitter.com/jasnell/status/1245410283582918657). 

Reviewer 2: Added a TODO so this won't hold up merging this PR: https://github.com/HTTPArchive/almanac.httparchive.org/pull/1599/commits/80edfff46ebe7e48a7f9f040593776d8f3514497

</figure>

### Not everything is implemented

So when can we start using HTTP/3 and QUIC for real? Not quite yet, but hopefully soon. There's a [large number of mature open source implementations](https://github.com/quicwg/base-drafts/wiki/Implementations) and the major browsers have experimental support. However, most of the typical servers have suffered some delays: nginx is a bit behind other stacks, apache hasn’t announced official support, and NodeJS relies on OpenSSL, which [won’t add QUIC support anytime soon](https://github.com/openssl/openssl/pull/8797). Next to this, some features like connection migration, HTTP/3's new prioritization scheme, or 0-RTT support aren’t widespread yet.

As such, you yourself can start experimenting with HTTP/3 today, but be careful with drawing too general conclusions from the performance that you’re seeing today!

## Conclusion

In conclusion, we can say that HTTP/3 and QUIC are nearly here, and we will start seeing their deployments rise throughout 2021. They are highly advanced protocols with powerful performance and security features, such as a new HTTP prioritization system, HOL blocking removal, and 0-RTT connection establishment. 

> Sadly, this sophistication also makes them difficult to deploy and use correctly, as has turned out to be the case for HTTP/2. As such, we can predict (and recommend) that early deployments will mainly be done via the early adopting CDNs such as Cloudflare, Fastly and Akamai. This will probably mean that a large part of HTTP/2 traffic can and will be upgraded to HTTP/3 automatically in 2021, giving the new protocol a large traffic share almost out of the box. When and if smaller or individual deployments will follow suit is however more difficult to answer. Most likely, we will continue to see a healthy mix of HTTP/3, HTTP/2 and even HTTP/1.1 on the web for years to come. It will be interesting to see the numbers in next year's Web Almanac!

Reviewer 2: Added a TODO so this won't hold up merging this PR: https://github.com/HTTPArchive/almanac.httparchive.org/pull/1599/commits/80edfff46ebe7e48a7f9f040593776d8f3514497

> Sadly, this sophistication also makes them difficult to deploy and use correctly, as has turned out to be the case for HTTP/2. As such, we can predict (and recommend) that early deployments will mainly be done via the early adopting CDNs such as Cloudflare, Fastly and Akamai. This will probably mean that a large part of HTTP/2 traffic can and will be upgraded to HTTP/3 automatically in 2021, giving the new protocol a large traffic share almost out of the box. When and if smaller or individual deployments will follow suit is however more difficult to answer. Most likely, we will continue to see a healthy mix of HTTP/3, HTTP/2 and even HTTP/1.1 on the web for years to come. It will be interesting to see the numbers in next year's Web Almanac!

Author: Take a look now.

      <tr>
        <td>100%</td>
        <td>Bison Grid, Hosting4CDN, MediaCloud, NYI FTW, PageCDN, Pressable CDN, QUIC.cloud, Roast.io, SwiftyCDN, Zycada Networks</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td>90 - 99%</td>
        <td>Advanced Hosters CDN, Azion, CDN77, Facebook, GoCache, ImageEngine, KeyCDN, Microsoft Azure,NetDNA,Netlify, Nexcess CDN, Reapleaf, Sirv CDN, Twitter, jsDelivr, section.io, Airee, BunnyCDN, Cloudflare,Erstream, Internap, LeaseWeb CDN, Medianova, Myra Security CDN, NGENIX, OnApp, SFR, StackPath, Sucuri Firewall, TRBCDN, VegaCDN, Yottaa</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td>70 - 89%</td>
        <td>Amazon CloudFront, BelugaCDN, CDN, CDN77, Erstream, Fastly, Highwinds, OVH CDN, Yottaa, Edgecast, Myra Security CDN, StackPath, XLabs Security</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td>20 - 69%</td>
        <td>Akamai, Aryaka, Google, Limelight, Rackspace, Incapsula, Level 3, Medianova, OnApp, Singular CDN, Vercel, Cachefly, Cedexis, Reflected Networks, Universal CDN, Yunjiasu, CDNetworks</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td> < 20%</td>
        <td>Rocket CDN, BO.LT, ChinaCache, KINX CDN, Zenedge, ChinaNetCenter </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>

> <figcaption>{{ figure_link(caption="Percentage of HTTP/2 requests served by the third-party resouce CDNs over mobile, sheets_gid="781660433", sql_file="cdn_detail_by_cdn.sql"") }}</figcaption>

Reviewer 2: My bad. This is causing the tests to fail as page can't generate:

```suggestion
<figcaption>{{ figure_link(caption="Percentage of HTTP/2 requests served by the third-party resouce CDNs over mobile", sheets_gid="781660433", sql_file="cdn_detail_by_cdn.sql") }}</figcaption>
```

<figcaption>{{ figure_link(caption="Percentage of HTTP/2 requests served by the third-party resouce CDNs over mobile", sheets_gid="781660433", sql_file="cdn_detail_by_cdn.sql") }}</figcaption>
</figure>

## How is HTTP/2 performing ?

> Measuring the impact of how a protocol is performing is difficult with the current HTTPArchive approach. It would be really fascinating to be able to quantify the impact of concurrent connections, the effect of packet loss and differrent congestion control mechanisms. To really compare performance each web site would have to be crawled over each protocol over different network conditions. What we can do  instead is to look into the impact on the number of connections a web site uses.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Measuring the impact of how a protocol is performing is difficult with the current HTTPArchive approach. It would be really fascinating to be able to quantify the impact of concurrent connections, the effect of packet loss and differrent congestion control mechanisms. To really compare performance each web site would have to be crawled over each protocol over different network conditions. What we can do instead is to look into the impact on the number of connections a web site uses.
```

In 1997, HTTP/1.1 was introduced to allow TCP connection reuse by introducing 'keep-alives', aimed at reducing the total cost of connection start-ups. Over time, increasing website performance expectations led to the need for concurrency of requests. HTTP/1.1 could only request another resource after the previous response had completed. Therefore additional TCP connections had to be established, reducing the impact of the keep-alive connections and further increasing overhead.

HTTP/2, published in 2015, is a binary-based protocol that introduced the concept of bidirectional streams between client and server. Using these streams, a browser can make optimal use of a single TCP connection to **multiplex** multiple HTTP requests/responses concurrently. HTTP/2 also introduced a prioritization scheme to steer this multiplexing; clients can signal a request priority that allows more important resources to be sent ahead of others.

> 

Reviewer 3: There are a few, very brief mentions of HTTP/3 in the text, before we describe it. It might help to just mention here something like "HTTP/3 is the next major version undergoing standardisation alongside IETF QUIC. More details at [anchor link]"

Author: It is described in the introduction a paragraph above ... 

>  .. HTTP/3 and QUIC (a new latency reducing, reliable, and secure transport protocol) have been under standards development in the IETF QUIC working group...

Reviewer 3: I should l2read 😀

When reviewing the total number of web site requests, there will be a bias towards common third-party domains. To get a better understanding of the HTTP/2 adoption by server install we will look instead at the protocol used to serve the HTML from the home page of a site.

Last year around 37% of home pages were served over HTTP/2 and 63% over HTTP/1. This year, combining mobile and desktop, it is an equal 50% split with slightly more desktop sites being served over HTTP/2 for the first time, as shown in Figure 22.4.

 <figure markdown>
| Protocol | Desktop | Mobile |
| -------- | ------- | ------ |
| HTTP/1.0 |  0.06%  |  0.05% |
| HTTP/1.1 | 49.22%  | 50.05% |
| HTTP/2   | 49.97%  | 49.28% |

<figcaption>{{ figure_link(caption="HTTP version usage for home pages.", sheets_gid="1447413141", sql_file="measure_of_all_http_versions_for_main_page_of_all_sites.sql") }}</figcaption>
</figure>

> gQUIC is not seen in the home page data for two reasons. To measure a website over gQUIC the HTTP Archive crawl would have to perform protocol negotiation via the alternative service(link to section) header and then use this endpoint to load the site over gQUIC. This is not supported this year - expect it to be available in next year’s almanac. Also, gQUIC is predominantly used for third-party Google tools rather than serving home pages.

Reviewer 3: (link to section) needs resolving

  chart_url="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/e/2PACX-1vSOkWXtrbMfTLdhlKbBGDjRU3zKbnCQi3iPhfuKaFs5mj4smEzInDCYEnk63gBdgsJ3GFk2gf4FOKCU/pubchart?oid=1779365083&format=interactive",
  sheets_gid="1457263817",
  sql_file="cdn_summary.sql"
)
}}

Figure 22.13 shows the difference in HTTP/2 and gQUIC adoption when a web site is using a CDN. 70% of pages use HTTP/2 for all 3rd party requests when a CDN is used. Without a CDN, only 25% of pages use HTTP/2 for all third party requests.

Figure 22.14 shows the breakdown of HTTP/2 responses for 3rd party CDNs for mobile requests.

<figure>
  <table>
    <thead>
      <tr>
        <th scope="colgroup" class="no-wrap">HTTP/2 and gQUIC (%)</th>
        <th scope="colgroup">Third-party resource CDN</th>
      </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>100%</td>
        <td>Bison Grid, Hosting4CDN, MediaCloud, NYI FTW, PageCDN, Pressable CDN, QUIC.cloud, Roast.io, SwiftyCDN, Zycada Networks</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td>90 - 99%</td>

>         <td>Advanced Hosters CDN, Azion, CDN77, Facebook, GoCache, ImageEngine, KeyCDN, Microsoft Azure,NetDNA,Netlify, Nexcess CDN, Reapleaf, Sirv CDN, Twitter, jsDelivr, section.io, Airee, BunnyCDN, Cloudflare,Erstream, Internap, LeaseWeb CDN, Medianova, Myra Security CDN, NGENIX, OnApp, SFR, StackPath, Sucuri Firewall, TRBCDN, VegaCDN, Yottaa</td>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        <td>Advanced Hosters CDN, Azion, CDN77, Facebook, GoCache, ImageEngine, KeyCDN, Microsoft Azure, NetDNA, Netlify, Nexcess CDN, Reapleaf, Sirv CDN, Twitter, jsDelivr, section.io, Airee, BunnyCDN, Cloudflare, Erstream, Internap, LeaseWeb CDN, Medianova, Myra Security CDN, NGENIX, OnApp, SFR, StackPath, Sucuri Firewall, TRBCDN, VegaCDN, Yottaa</td>
```

Think of a flow control process, where each flow exerts pressure on the other flows to signal to provide a fair share of the network and be responsive to the pressure from all other flows.  In a fair protocol every TCP session does not crowd out any other session and over time will take 1/N of the path capacity.

The majority of websites still open over 15 TCP connections. In HTTP/1.1, the 6 connections a browser could open to a domain can over time claim six times as much bandwidth as a single HTTP/2 connection. Over low capacity networks this can slow down the delivery of content from the primary asset domains as the number of contending connections increases and takes bandwidth away from the important requests. This favours websites with a small number of third-party domains.

HTTP/2 does allow for connection reuse ([Section 9.1.1](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7540#section-9.1)) across different, but related, domains. For a TLS resource, it requires a certificate that is valid for the host in the URI. This can be used to reduce the number of connections required for domains under the control of the site author.

### HTTP/2 prioritization

> As HTTP/2 responses can be split into many individual frames, and as frames from multiple streams can be multiplexed, the order in which the frames are interleaved and delivered by the server becomes a critical performance consideration. A typical website consists of many different types of resources: the visible content (HTML, CSS, images), the application logic (JavaScript), ads, analytics for tracking site usage, and marketing tracking beacons. With knowledge of how a browser works, an optimal ordering of the resources can be defined that will result in the fastest user experience (and the difference between optimal and not can be significant - as much as a 50% improvement or more).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As HTTP/2 responses can be split into many individual frames, and as frames from multiple streams can be multiplexed, the order in which the frames are interleaved and delivered by the server becomes a critical performance consideration. A typical website consists of many different types of resources: the visible content (HTML, CSS, images), the application logic (JavaScript), ads, analytics for tracking site usage, and marketing tracking beacons. With knowledge of how a browser works, an optimal ordering of the resources can be defined that will result in the fastest user experience (and the difference between optimal and non-optimal can be significant - as much as a 50% improvement or more).
```

HTTP/2 introduced the concept of prioritization to help the client communicate to the server how it thinks the multiplexing should be done. Every stream is assigned a weight (how much of the available bandwidth the stream should be allocated) and possibly a parent (another stream which should be delivered first). With the flexibility of HTTP/2’s prioritization model, it is not altogether surprising that all of the current browser engines implemented [different prioritization strategies](https://calendar.perfplanet.com/2018/http2-prioritization/), none of which are [optimal](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nH4iRpFnf1c).

> There are also problems on the server side, leading to many servers either implementing prioritization poorly or not at all.  In the case of HTTP/1.x, tuning the server-side send buffers to be as big as possible has no downside other than the increase in memory use (trading off memory for CPU) and is an effective way to increase the throughput of a web server. This is not true for HTTP/2, as data in the send buffer cannot be re-prioritized if a request for a new, more important request comes in.  For an HTTP/2 server, the optimal send buffer size is thus the minimum amount of data required to fully utilize the available bandwidth. This allows the server to respond immediately if a higher-priority response is received.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There are also problems on the server side, leading to many servers either implementing prioritization poorly or not at all.  In the case of HTTP/1.x, tuning the server-side send buffers to be as big as possible has no downside other than the increase in memory use (trading off memory for CPU) and is an effective way to increase the throughput of a web server. This is not true for HTTP/2, as data in the TCP send buffer cannot be re-prioritized if a request for a new, more important resource comes in.  For an HTTP/2 server, the optimal send buffer size is thus the minimum amount of data required to fully utilize the available bandwidth. This allows the server to respond immediately if a higher-priority request is received.
```

This problem of large buffers messing with (re-)prioritization also exists in the network where it goes by the name “bufferbloat”.  Network equipment would rather buffer packets than drop them when there’s a short burst.  However, if the server sends more data than the path to the client can consume, these buffers fill to capacity. These bytes already “stored” on the network limit the server’s ability to send a higher-priority response earlier, just as a large send buffer does. To minimize the amount of data held in buffers, [a recent congestion control algorithm such as BBR should be used](https://blog.cloudflare.com/http-2-prioritization-with-nginx/).

> A [test suite](https://github.com/andydavies/http2-prioritization-issues) and a list of how various CDN/Cloud Hosting services perform was created. The bad news is that only 9 of the 36 prioritize correctly. Figure 22.16 shows that for sites using a CDN, around 31.7% do not prioritize correctly. This is up from 26.82% last year, mainly due to the increase in Google CDN usage. Rather than relying on the browser-sent priorities, there are some servers that implement a [server side prioritization](https://blog.cloudflare.com/better-http-2-prioritization-for-a-faster-web/) scheme instead, improving upon the browser’s hints with additional logic.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This [test suite](https://github.com/andydavies/http2-prioritization-issues) measures and reports how various CDN/Cloud Hosting services perform. The bad news is that only 9 of the 36 prioritize correctly. Figure 22.16 shows that for sites using a CDN, around 31.7% do not prioritize correctly. This is up from 26.82% last year, mainly due to the increase in Google CDN usage. Rather than relying on the browser-sent priorities, there are some servers that implement a [server side prioritization](https://blog.cloudflare.com/better-http-2-prioritization-for-a-faster-web/) scheme instead, improving upon the browser’s hints with additional logic.
```

|-------------------|---------|--------|--------|
| Not using CDN     | Unknown | 59.47% | 60.85% |
| Cloudflare        | Pass    | 22.03% | 21.32% |
| Google            | Fail    | 8.26%  | 8.94%  |
| Amazon CloudFront | Fail    | 2.64%  | 2.27%  |
| Fastly            | Pass    | 2.34%  | 1.78%  |
| Akamai            | Pass    | 1.31%  | 1.19%  |
| Automattic        | Pass    | 0.93%  | 1.05%  |
| Sucuri Firewall   | Fail    | 0.77%  | 0.63%  |
| Incapsula         | Fail    | 0.42%  | 0.34%  |
| Netlify           | Fail    | 0.27%  | 0.20%  |

<figcaption>{{ figure_link(caption="HTTP/2 prioritization support in common CDNs.", sheets_gid="1152953475", sql_file="percentage_of_h2_and_h3_sites_affected_by_cdn_prioritization.sql") }}</figcaption>
</figure>

For non-CDN usage, I expect the number of servers that correctly apply HTTP/2 prioritization to be considerably smaller. For example, [NodeJS’s HTTP/2 implementation does not even support prioritization](https://twitter.com/jasnell/status/1245410283582918657).

{# TODO consider rewording to come across as less of a dig. Or at least removing the word "even" #}

### Goodbye Server push?

> Server Push was one of the additional features of HTTP/2 that caused some confusion and  complexity to implement in practice. Push seeks to avoid waiting for a browser/client to download a HTML page, parse that page, and only then discover that it requires a stylesheet. Once the stylesheet has been loaded, the browser parses that, only to realise it also needs a font. All these round-trips take time.  With server push, in theory, the server can just send multiple responses at once, saving the extra round trips.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Server Push was one of the additional features of HTTP/2 that caused some confusion and  complexity to implement in practice. Push seeks to avoid waiting for a browser/client to download a HTML page, parse that page, and only then discover that it requires additional resources (such as a stylesheet), which in turn have to be fetched and parsed to discover even more dependencies (such as fonts). All that work and round trips takes time.  With server push, in theory, the server can just send multiple responses at once, avoiding the extra round trips.
```

The example is good but it reads a bit too specifically, push can be (mis)used for a lot of resource types.

> Unfortunately, with TCP congestion control in play, the data transfer starts off so slowly that [not all the assets can be pushed until multiple round trips have increased the transfer rate sufficiently](https://calendar.perfplanet.com/2016/http2-push-the-details/). There were also [implementation differences](https://jakearchibald.com/2017/h2-push-tougher-than-i-thought/) between browsers as the client processing model had not been fully agreed. For example, each browser has a different implementation of a ‘push cache’.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Unfortunately, with TCP congestion control in play, the data transfer starts off so slowly that [not all the assets can be pushed until multiple round trips have increased the transfer rate sufficiently](https://calendar.perfplanet.com/2016/http2-push-the-details/). There are also [implementation differences](https://jakearchibald.com/2017/h2-push-tougher-than-i-thought/) between browsers as the client processing model had not been fully agreed. For example, each browser has a different implementation of a ‘push cache’.
```

> Another issue is that the server is not aware of resources the browser already has cached. The client can send a RST_STREAM frame to indicate that the asset is not required, but by the time this has happened, the server may well have already sent all the data.  This wastes bandwidth, and the server has lost the opportunity of immediately sending something that the browser actually requires. There were [proposals](https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-httpbis-cache-digest-05) to allow clients to inform the server of their cache status, but these suffered from privacy concerns.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Another issue is that the server is not aware of resources the browser has already cached. When a server tries to push something that is unwanted, the client can send a RST_STREAM frame but by the time this has happened, the server may well have already sent all the data.  This wastes bandwidth, and the server has lost the opportunity of immediately sending something that the browser actually did require. There were [proposals](https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-httpbis-cache-digest-05) to allow clients to inform the server of their cache status, but these suffered from privacy concerns.
```

<figcaption>{{ figure_link(caption="Distribtion of pushed asset sizes (KB) by content type on mobile.", sheets_gid="238923402", sql_file="number_of_h2_and_h3_pushed_resources_and_bytes_by_content_type.sql") }}</figcaption>
</figure>

Given the low adoption and after measuring how few of the pushed resources are actually useful (match a request that is not already cached), Google has announced the [intent to remove push support from Chrome]( https://groups.google.com/a/chromium.org/g/blink-dev/c/K3rYLvmQUBY/m/vOWBKZGoAQAJ) for both HTTP/2 and gQUIC. Chrome have also not implemented push for HTTP/3.

Despite all these problems, there are circumstances where server push can provide an improvement. The ideal use case is to be able to send a push promise much earlier than the HTML response itself. A scenario where this can benefit is [when a CDN is in use](https://medium.com/@ananner/http-2-server-push-performance-a-further-akamai-case-study-7a17573a3317). The 'dead-time' between the CDN receiving the request and receiving a response from the origin can be used intelligently to warm up the TCP connection and push assets already cached at the CDN.

> There was however no standardized method of how to signal to a CDN edge server that an asset should be pushed. Implementations instead reused the preload HTTP link header to indicate this.  This simple approach appears elegant but does not utilise the ‘dead time’ before the HTML is generated unless the headers are sent before the actual content is ready. It triggers the edge to push resources as the HTML is received at the edge which will contend with the  delivery of the HTML.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There was however no standardized method for how to signal to a CDN edge server that an asset should be pushed. Implementations instead reused the preload HTTP link header to indicate this.  This simple approach appears elegant but does not utilise the ‘dead time’ before the HTML is generated unless the headers are sent before the actual content is ready. It triggers the edge to push resources as the HTML is received at the edge which will contend with the  delivery of the HTML.
```

An alternative proposal being tested is [RFC 8297](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8297) which defines an informative HTTP 103 Early Hints response.  This permits headers to be sent immediately, without having to wait for the server to generate the full response headers.  This can be used by an origin to suggest pushed resources to a CDN, or by a CDN to alert the client to resources that need to be fetched. However, at present, support of this from both a client and server perspective is very low, [but growing](https://www.fastly.com/blog/beyond-server-push-experimenting-with-the-103-early-hints-status-code).

## Getting to a better protocol

> Let’s say a client and server support both HTTP/1.1 and HTTP/2. How do they choose which one to use? The most common method is the TLS Application Layer Protocol Negotiation (ALPN). Using this, clients send a list of protocols they support to the server, which picks the one it prefers to use for that connection.  Because the browser needs to negotiate the TLS parameters as part of setting up an HTTPS connection, it can also negotiate the HTTP version at the same time. Since both HTTP/2 and HTTP/1.1 can be served from the same TCP port (443), browsers don’t need to make this selection before opening a connection.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Let’s say a client and server support both HTTP/1.1 and HTTP/2. How do they choose which one to use? The most common method is TLS Application Layer Protocol Negotiation (ALPN), where clients send a list of protocols they support to the server and it picks the one it prefers to use for that connection.  Because the browser needs to negotiate the TLS parameters as part of setting up an HTTPS connection, it can also negotiate the HTTP version at the same time. Since both HTTP/2 and HTTP/1.1 can be served from the same TCP port (443), browsers don’t need to make this selection before opening a connection.
```

### Upgrade

The Upgrade header has been part of HTTP for a long time.  In HTTP/1.x, Upgrade allows a client to make a request using one protocol, but indicate its support for another protocol (like HTTP/2).  If the server also supports the offered protocol, it responds with a status 101 (Switching Protocols) and proceeds to answer the request in the new protocol.  If not, the server answers the request in HTTP/1.x.  Servers can advertise their support of a different protocol using an Upgrade header on a response.

The most common application of Upgrade is Websockets.  HTTP/2 also defines an Upgrade path, for use with its unencrypted cleartext mode.  There is no support for this capability in web browsers however.  Therefore, it’s not surprising that less than 3% of HTTP/1.1 requests in our dataset received an Upgrade header in the response.  A very small number (0.0011% of HTTP/2, 0.064% of HTTP/1.1) of requests using TLS also received Upgrade headers in response; these are likely cleartext HTTP/1.1 servers behind intermediaries which speak HTTP/2 and/or terminate TLS, but don’t properly remove Upgrade headers.

### Alternative Services

> Alternative Services (Alt-Svc) enables an HTTP origin to indicate other endpoints which serve the same content, possibly over different protocols.  Although uncommon, HTTP/2 might be located at a different port or different host from a site’s HTTP/1.1 service.  More importantly, since HTTP/3 uses UDP where prior versions of HTTP use TCP, HTTP/3 will always be at a different endpoint from the HTTP/1.x and HTTP/2 service.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Alternative Services (Alt-Svc) enables an HTTP origin to indicate other endpoints which serve the same content, possibly over different protocols.  Although uncommon, HTTP/2 might be located at a different port or different host from a site’s HTTP/1.1 service.  More importantly, since HTTP/3 uses QUIC (hence UDP) where prior versions of HTTP use TCP, HTTP/3 will always be at a different endpoint from the HTTP/1.x and HTTP/2 service.
```

#### So will HTTP/3 help?

In conclusion, on the surface HTTP/3 is not really all that different from HTTP/2. It doesn’t really add major new features, but mainly changes how the existing ones work under the surface. The real improvements come from QUIC, which offers faster connection setups, increased robustness and resilience to packet loss. As such, HTTP/3 is expected to do better than HTTP/2 on worse networks, while offering very similar performance on faster systems. However, that is if we can get HTTP/3 working, which can be challenging in practice.

### Deploying and discovering QUIC and HTTP/3

> Since QUIC and HTTP/3 run over UDP things aren't as simple as with HTTP/1.1 or HTTP/2. Typically an HTTP/3 client has to first discover that QUIC is available at the server. The recommended method for this is HTTP Alternative Services, as described earlier. On its first visit to a website, a client connects to a server using TCP. It then discovers via Alt-Svc that H3 is available, and can set up a new QUIC connection. The Alt-Svc entry can be cached, allowing subsequent visits to avoid the TCP step, but the entry will eventually become stale and need revalidation. This likely will have to be done for each domain separately, which will probably lead to most page loads using a mix of H1, H2 and H3.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Since QUIC and HTTP/3 run over UDP things aren't as simple as with HTTP/1.1 or HTTP/2. Typically an HTTP/3 client has to first discover that QUIC is available at the server. The recommended method for this is HTTP Alternative Services, as described earlier. On its first visit to a website, a client connects to a server using TCP. It then discovers via Alt-Svc that HTTP/3 is available, and can set up a new QUIC connection. The Alt-Svc entry can be cached, allowing subsequent visits to avoid the TCP step, but the entry will eventually become stale and need revalidation. This likely will have to be done for each domain separately, which will probably lead to most page loads using a mix of HTTP/1, HTTP/2 and HTTP/3.
```

QUIC is dependent on TLS1.3, which is used for around 41% of requests, which means the other 60% of requests will need to update their TLS stack to support HTTP/3.

#### Dual stack deployment implications

From the discussion above, we expect QUIC and TCP to continue running in parallel for some time. We expect servers (e.g., nginx/apache/nodejs) to offer easy ways to do so, but this is still likely to complicate localhost test setups. Furthermore, there's probably a longer term impact on the HTTP Archive and WebPageTest projects.  The amount of pages crawled will increase substantially if we want to crawl both the HTTP/3 and H2/H1 versions, or the runtimes will increase if we want to prioritize HTTP/3.

Currently, some browsers provide (temporary) command line arguments to force QUIC on a certain origin to make this easier, but this is not the most user-friendly option of course. Over time, this will probably become easier to configure. For example, this command will force Chrome to try a QUIC connection to localhost immediately without having to discover it via alternative services :

```

> chrome --enable-quic --quic-version=h3-29 --origin-to-force-quic-on=localhost:6121 http://localhost:6121/

Reviewer 3: Does the target need to be `https`? Maybe @rmarx knows.

Reviewer: Good point, and I assume it does need to be https. Even if it isn't a hard requirement, it makes more sense to make it https:// here

```

### Not everything is implemented

So when can we start using HTTP/3 and QUIC for real? Not quite yet, but hopefully soon. There's a [large number of mature open source implementations](https://github.com/quicwg/base-drafts/wiki/Implementations) and the major browsers have experimental support. However, most of the typical servers have suffered some delays: nginx is a bit behind other stacks, apache hasn’t announced official support, and NodeJS relies on OpenSSL, which [won’t add QUIC support anytime soon](https://github.com/openssl/openssl/pull/8797). Next to this, some features like connection migration, HTTP/3's new prioritization scheme, or 0-RTT support aren’t widespread yet.

As such, you yourself can start experimenting with HTTP/3 today, but be careful with drawing too general conclusions from the performance that you’re seeing today!

## Conclusion

> {# TODO This Conclusion seems like a conclusion to HTTP/3 rather than to the whole chapter. Should we add a paragraph concluding HTTP/2's usage on top of this? #}

Reviewer 3: Yes. :D

I suggest renaming `### Not everything is implemented` to `### Looking ahead`, then combine/deduplicate the following text with the text already in that section. Then, `## Conclusion` can pick out some of the most interesting trends presented for HTTP/2 and simply say "HTTP/3 is around the corner, we expect next year's Almanac to see some interesting new data"

Author: See what you think now.

Reviewer 2: LGTM!

Slight niggle would be "Looking Toward the Future: HTTP/3" and "Looking ahead" are very similar. Maybe change latter to "Is HTTP/3 ready for use yet?", or "Is HTTP/3 available now?" Or similar?

Anyway shall we merge this and revisit in editing?

Author: updated .. ready to merge
